I notice it's a little delayed. Hey, everybody, welcome to today's RStudio Enterprise Community
Meetup. I'm joined here by Tom and we're just chatting for a second to see if the LinkedIn
stream is working as well. How are you doing today, Tom?
I'm doing great. Happy Tuesday. It's always a good day of the week.
Awesome. Let me go over to LinkedIn and see if we can see ourselves over there.
I'll just mention that for today's slides, the link will be at the bottom of every slide,
so you can always copy it from there if you come in later, as well as we're going to be screen
sharing and using multiplex for the first time today, which will allow us to actually change
the slide on other people's computers, which is kind of neat. So we'll try that out.
Awesome. Well, look at that. It is working on LinkedIn. So hi, friends. Thank you so much for
joining today. Welcome to the RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup. I'm Rachel and I've met so many
of you already, so thank you for joining back today. I'm calling in from Boston today and we
are streaming out to LinkedIn and YouTube right now. So if you've just joined now, feel free to
say hi through the chat, maybe where you're calling in from. So excited to have you here for
our third Cordo meetup in the past few months. If you missed the past two, welcome to Cordo
workshop and building a blog with Cordo. I'll be sure to share those in the chat as well.
But today we are joined by my friend here at RStudio, Tom Mock, who is going to teach us
about building beautiful reports and presentations with Cordo. If this is your first time joining
one of these sessions, this is a friendly and open meetup environment for teams to share use
cases, teach lessons learned, and just meet each other and ask questions. Together, we're all
dedicated to making this an inclusive and open environment for everybody, no matter your experience,
industry, or background. So I will also share a link in the chat where you can find out about
other upcoming events too, because we have these meetups every Tuesday at 12 Eastern time. We also
have a data science hangout every Thursday at 12 Eastern time. We'd love to see you at those too.
I just want to say during the event today, you are able to ask questions on the platform that
you're watching from, and it will pull together here for us, or also anonymously through Slido,
and we'll share that link in just a second here and pull it up on the screen.
But thank you again so much for joining us here today. I'm so excited to have you with us here too,
Tom, and I will turn it over to you. Awesome. Thanks so much for hosting, Rachel, and for all
your help in getting this stuff off the ground. We're going to be talking about beautiful reports
and presentations with Cordo. It feels a little bit meta in the sense that you're presenting about
Cordo, with Cordo, on Cordo, kind of like all the things wrapping up together. And something we're
trying out today, and I think one of the benefits of using a format like Cordo or Reveal.js through
Cordo, is that for now, Rachel's actually sharing her screen. So I'm able to actually advance and
modify slides on her computer just by changing them on mine. So you can imagine a situation kind
of like today, where maybe my computer is acting a little funky, and I'm actually allowing my
colleague to screen share or to work, you know, remotely on their own computer, or like for y'all,
if you access the slides from the URL at the bottom of the screen, I can actually advance and
kind of display the slides as you're progressing through them, whether in a teaching setting or in
kind of this webinar style setting. So we're going to get kicked off, and I will run with it.
So first off, I just want to mention that, you know, we talk about this pretty frequently,
but Cordo and RStudio have very deep integration together. So you have what's called the visual
editor. So this is just a screenshot of a few different things from the visual editor mode
in RStudio. You can use this to do word processing and kind of modification of Cordo documents,
including presentations. And there's lots of helpers there for inserting divs and spans,
some things we'll be talking about, as well as things like tables, graphics, links, code chunks,
lots of help in terms of making you more productive. One of the benefits that Cordo
provides is that the visual editor mode is available for really all the different formats.
So again, whether you're writing a presentation or a report or something else,
those can all be edited in visual editor mode.
The first thing we're going to talk about for today, and we've got a lot of kind of content
to cover, so I'm trying to provide a lot of overview and kind of exciting broad overview
of things that are available in Cordo. So first off, we have static documents or essentially
reports that you're writing. I like to think of these as like your daily driver. You know,
you can use it for basic kind of exploratory work, but it's powerful enough to also present
and kind of display results to your colleagues, even published to a journal or as the final
output for your team to share with leadership or other stakeholders. I think Cordo and static
documents are most powerful when they're combining this idea of like written thoughts and observations
like the human in the loop in terms of I'm adding context and adding prose and text about what I'm
working on, but I'm also including the source code there so I can be reproducible in creating
my journal article or creating my documentation or creating my report that I'm putting together.
So in that spirit of kind of combining source code with the report they're actually generating,
we're going to kick off by talking about parameters and parameterized Cordo reporting.
You may have used these in our markdown, or maybe you never used parameters in our markdown before,
but parameters work inside Cordo as a way to create different variations of the same document
by changing out small components. Most commonly you see examples of this like I want to create
a report for this specific region. So like for today's Tidy Tuesday data, it's you know 50
different states and all the different things that are available within those, and you could
imagine I want to generate a report for Texas as well as Massachusetts or New York or California,
like all these different states that I want to create separate reports for.
But it could also be covering a specific time period. So if you're doing like a time series
analysis, maybe you want to report over the past year, but maybe someone asks you say,
okay well I just need the data for the past month. Rather than restarting that report from scratch,
you could actually use parameters to regenerate that with just changing out the date.
Or kind of last example, just rerunning a single analysis multiple times and changing components.
So maybe you're doing machine learning with Tidy models and you're switching out the different
engines that are available for that model. So you can still do like a random forest,
but change it out from ranger to the random forest model to a spark model for example.
And we'll walk through a few of these different examples.
There's two ways of actually defining parameters. In Python, if you're using that with Cordo,
we use what's called paper mill style, which is a way of again providing parameters and generating
many reports from one set of source code. In this situation, the tags are actually generated
within the code chunk. So you use the hash pipe syntax, then you define tags, and then you have
like a vector of parameters that you're creating. So in this case, we have alpha and ratio,
they're being defined as both being 0.1. These can be accessed later on in the document by name.
So they're not, they're really kind of like first class objects in the situation of like you can't
name something else alpha or ratio, those are going to be the actual in kind of memory object
that you're using in Python. In R or using the knitter engine, we'll define them in the YAML.
So you'll use what are called the params key. And then you can define specific parameters there,
again, like alpha and ratio and given specific values, whether the numeric or text or other
strings. These are accessed in source code using the params dollar sign syntax. So you actually
extract something like alpha from the params environment. In this situation, you could
actually have alpha being in the in memory as an object, and then params dollar sign alpha that
you can access separately. But generally, you don't really want to name them exactly the same
to avoid kind of namespace collisions. The last option here is you can actually define and modify
parameters from your command line interface to Cordo or via the terminal. So if you call Cordo
render on a specific document, you can modify the parameters with the dash P and then define
the new parameter you want to change. So if I wanted to change alpha to 0.2 and ratio to 0.3,
I could have multiple calls with dash P and then alpha equals 0.2 and dash P ratio equals 0.3.
And again, so regardless of kind of how you're building out your document, what language you're
using, there's there's these ways to approach it and modify the document so that when you're
generating it, you can get multiple reports from the same set of source code. Now that we've kind
of talked a little bit about what parameters kind of how they're defined, let's actually show a
little bit of how those could be used. So I have this example of a pretty simple report. In this
case, we're using the Palmer Penguins data set, and we're generating out a report that looks
something like this on the right, just as you know, when it was published. And it's got data
about this set of penguins and which ones are classified as this specific species.
At the top left this slide on line five of the YAML, it says params equals species equals to
Adelaide. So that's the default in terms of if we render this document as is, it's actually going to
always generate a report for Adelaide penguins. You know, it's not changing itself unless we say
we're going to change it. But we can access that parameter with params$species in a couple
different locations. So we can use it in our filter step on line eight of the first code chunk.
But we can also use it in inline code with the backtick r params$species. And again, report on
it both in inline code as well as in our overall code chunk. But the big takeaway being we could
actually change out that parameter to a different species and actually get a whole new report from
the same Cordo document. So if we were to do this via the CLI, we might do something like Cordo
render that report or Cordo render that report as say like an iPython notebook if we're doing it
from Jupyter in that situation. And then we could define specific parameters with the dash p
and change species to gen2 and get this gen2 report out as opposed to a different name. So
we can actually say the output is going to be a new report name because we don't want to overwrite
the existing Adelaide report that we've generated. So this is fine in terms of like I can render it
with the CLI. I can modify that parameter on the fly. But maybe I don't want to use the command
line interface to do this rendering. I could also do it with something like your R code. So I might
have a render function I write. In this case, I'm using the R package Cordo and Cordo underscore
render. And this allows me to take in an existing report, penguin report.qmd, modify the parameters
according to which species we're applying, and then name the report according to again which
species we're using. So here we can find all the unique species across this whole data set,
walk across them, or regenerate the report with the per R package and render that on each of the
three penguin species. This will create something like the Adelaide report, the Chinstrap report,
and the Gentoo report, all of which have slightly different parameters that have been
modified. And now we have three different versions of the report by species as opposed to having to
rewrite the entire report from scratch or copy paste code across. So using parameterized reports
like this, even if you're doing it for, you know, really sophisticated, nice looking reports that
you're building is one of the powers and kind of superpowers of using code and using things like
Cordo to generate out those documents. Another example that might be more applicable to folks
coming from like the machine learning aspect is maybe you have a report and, you know, we'll just
say that we're adapting it from some tidy models docs. In this case, we're using our parameter of
a specific engine. So the default is using the Ranger engine, and we're using that for a random
forest model. But we can also change out that engine to any other engines that the tidy models
ecosystem can accept. So we can take that same tidy models example report, use the random forest
engine, or the Ranger engine, or Spark engine. And again, all, you know, reusing most of the
source code, but just changing out that engine and running in a slightly different context.
If we do this, we can actually generate out two sets of kind of predictions or two sets of metrics
from this report. So, you know, these really don't look any different, but just that we have run the
report twice. And if you look at some of the very small value changes, we can actually see that the
values did change. So like on line nine, on both sides, we have a prediction of 5.25 versus 5.32.
And the accuracy or the RMSE and some other metrics are actually slightly better when we
use the Ranger engine for this. So regardless, in terms of like, whether you're trying to
regenerate a new report that you're actually using to tell a story, or if you're doing
exploratory analysis and doing like different models or different engines that you're trying to
run, you can use parameters to modify and decrease the amount of code that you have to write for
doing those steps. So while I think parameters are really exciting, and I wanted to kick off with
that as like, there's a benefit to using code. One of the other benefits that Cordo provides is,
you know, regardless of if you're using lots of code or changing it out or reusing it,
you might actually want to generate multiple different types of outputs.
So maybe you're creating a PDF document, a Word document, and an HTML report. You know, those are
three different ecosystems that all take quite different kind of code behind the scenes.
Cordo, as much as possible, tries to make that code easy to use in terms of using the same
syntax across all of them, and unifying the work that you're doing across different output formats.
So let's say we have this report. I have a dog named Howard, who's a Boston Terrier. So I took
an example from Wikipedia. There's this article about Boston Terriers. I copied it over and
converted it to a Cordo document. So with this unified syntax, I could do something like Cordo
render that document to HTML or to PDF. Now, I haven't optimized this document only for HTML,
meaning I haven't written a bunch of CSS, and I haven't optimized this document only for PDF,
meaning I haven't written a lot of LaTeX or really any LaTeX. I've only used Cordo-style
syntax for this, or kind of unified syntax that works across formats. When I generate this report
out, I get something that looks like this, where I have a nice-looking article. I've got an image
in the gutter. I've got hoverable citations. I've got a floating table of contents. You get all of
the power of what HTML can provide for a nice, you know, report or document you're creating.
But without changing that document and literally just saying render to PDF, I also get a really
nice-looking PDF document that's paginated and has, you know, whatever the limitations are of PDF,
like, doing that. In terms of it still reports on the history, it still has citations and images in
the sidebar or the margin, but I haven't necessarily had to optimize only for HTML or only for PDF.
I was actually able to use Cordo's unified syntax across both very different kind of outputs that
I'm creating. So, we're going to dive in a little bit to what this syntax is, how you can use it to
kind of be safe as to the different type of outputs you're creating, and walk across some of
that. And what I mean by this unified syntax is that Cordo makes heavy use of what are called
fence divs and bracketed spans. So, here on this page, we have fence divs. We have three colons
that start the fence and three colons that end the fence. So, you can imagine that when you're
writing these, you always need to have kind of a front and a start or the enclosing of some content
within those. Once we've used three colons to indicate the start and the end, we can then apply
a specific class or a specific name of the div that we're applying. So, it might be something
like dot class or dot panel tab set or whatever it is, just some name within those curly brackets
that are after the fence div. And then anything within the start and end of that fence div
will be modified. So, everything inside that will be affected in some way or you can alter it in a
useful way moving forward. This structure, again, starts and ends with an equal number of colons.
There's always a minimum of three, but they can be however many colons you want as long as it's
three or more and you match the start to the end. You're going to add those curly brackets
after the three colons, and this indicates the start and the end as well as the class. So, again,
like dot class or sometimes it doesn't require that dot and it might be something like word one
dash word two or sometimes dot dash class. Overall, just that when you see this syntax
inside maybe quarter documentation or in other examples, making you aware of what those mean.
One example of how to do this is we can actually do bigger layout of different images and include
alt text with them and other things. So, we'll have three colons, curly bracket, layout number
of columns equals to two. And this will create a two column layout. And as long as you have two
images, it'll put one on the left, one on the right, and then it'll start over. And if you
added more images, it would stack them always adding up to two columns. You can modify this
and have number of rows or number of columns be larger. But overall, just showing that this type
of syntax, again, can apply to Word or to PDF or to HTML. It's basically allowing you to be safe
across different types of output formats. Another example of how to use this is something like dot
panel dash tab set. Now, this one is very specific to HTML, but I just want to show off kind of some
of the things you can do with this. Some of it can be used only for protecting yourself against
different output formats. And other times, it can just be useful in terms of providing cool
things that HTML can do. So, a dot panel dash tab set allows you to create little tabs that you can
step through and kind of organize your code in that way. After you create the fence div, again,
with three colons to start, three colons to end, and then your class of dot panel dash tab set,
you'll define specific tabs by level two headers. So, you know, two pound signs, element one,
that'll be your first tab, two pound signs, element two, that'll be your second tab. And
then you can have content within each of them. What this looks like in practice is you might
actually have code and output. So, if I were to click on code first, it'll just show off the code
that is unevaluated. But if Rachel were to click on output, it would actually show the output there
on her screen. So, now she can actually click through and see, you know, have some type of
interactivity or have some type of interaction with the document in addition to me actually
having to step through all of it. Again, this is limited to HTML output because there's that true
interactivity, but just showing that these fence divs are not just for kind of doing some of the
basics but allow you to do more across all the different HTML formats as well.
If I wanted to create or show how that was actually shown on the page, that dot panel tab set,
and then I have a level two header code. I have some, you know, R code that I'm putting in there.
I have another level two header called output. And that one is actually going to eval equals true,
basically show the output, but echo equals false and not show the source code itself.
This is just a basic example, but you can imagine that you could have, again,
these multiple tab sets that you're using with fence divs, allowing the user to explore your
document and interact more with it as they're reading through or walking through the document.
The other item that allows you to, again, either protect yourself against different formats you're
creating for or just do cool things are what are called bracketed spans. We have a sentence
on this page that is missing some words. This is a magic text, basically text that shows up
after the fact when I click next on my side of the screen. We can do this, again, with what is
called a bracketed span. So we do square brackets around specific text, in this case magic text for
the previous example we were showing. And then just like with our fence divs, we apply a specific
class to that text. The main difference between these two is that a fence div will apply to like
an entire paragraph or a collection of text. And a bracketed span could be applied to a single word
or single words within an overall sentence. So you can imagine, you know, applying to the whole
paragraph versus small components of that, again, to, you know, help tell your story or indicate
something on the page. Here I'm using a dot fragment class, which is specific to presentations,
but this lets you actually delay the presentation and delay the specific word to show up later as
you're moving through that slide deck. So overall, you know, bracketed spans can do a lot, but just
showing one example here quickly inside the presentation format. The structure would be
something like this. You're going to surround specific text that you want to affect, or the
specific object you want to affect, with square brackets around it. And again, you have a left and
a right square bracket indicating a start and an end of what's being modified. Once that is written
out, you're going to add curly brackets to indicate the start and end of the specific class. So
something like curly bracket dot class or dot fragment, and then closing it off with another
curly bracket so that it can be fully interpreted. Again, this just allows you to modify specific
components of the text or style your document in specific ways. One example, it's a slight
modification of this, and one that we use in that report about Boston Terriers, is we actually create
inline footnotes. So something like some inline text with a kind of tilde and then the square
bracket footnote or this up arrow kind of symbol. This allows us to add a footnote or kind of this
like end note to a specific word. So in the document, it will show this as like a hyperlink
back to the footnote or the end note, but also allow you to inject a lot of text about that
overall. So it could be kind of like a citation or just an aside or a comment that you're making
that you don't want to display all the time. In HTML, these can be hoverable in terms of in an
HTML document, I can actually hover over those footnotes and see them displayed kind of as an
overlay in the document. In a PDF, they don't necessarily have the ability to render that
additional JavaScript or CSS, so they're just linked to the footnote or the end note at the
end of the page or at the end of the document. And what this looks like in practice is I might have
a sentence like, for example, did you know that Howard is a dog? And then adding a specific
footnote, specifically he is a Boston Terrier, although sometimes he acts like a cat. So by
providing that footnote, you know, that specifically all the way through cat, that whole section is
hidden on the page, but added as this footnote providing an additional context about the sentence
as we're walking through it. So if you're using this for kind of scientific documentation or just
kind of asides you're making a useful thing to add to your documents. The unified syntax can also do
more complex things in terms of we move back to fence divs, we can overall structure our document.
So here from that actual article I showed, I have a mixing of images aligning those with text and
paragraphs and putting it together something like this. So for here, I've applied a layout class
and I have the image as 30 percent of the width of the page, and then layout equals to 70 percent
for paragraph one, and then below that 100 indicating that paragraph two will take up the
remaining width of the page below the other two. And again, regardless of the output format, PDF or
Word or HTML, I can structure and kind of typeset my document using this type of syntax. I can also
move one of those images into the margin. So, you know, I had the small Boston Terrier that was on
the right side of the screen, I have a traditional kind of hyperlink to an image on this page,
and then I have a specific class on that called a dot column dash margin, and that actually takes
the image and throws it into the margin of the overall document while the rest of the body
continues on. And then as we talked about just previously, add things like footnotes. So information
about where did I get this detail, the average life of a Boston Terrier is around 11 to 13 years.
This was retrieved from the Boston Terrier Club of America and providing additional context about
that citation or around that detail that we're adding. So this unified syntax, again, while I
think that writing for HTML is some of the most powerful way you can actually do this,
in certain situations you have to write to PDF or you want to write to PDF or to Word doc so you can
collaborate on them in a different way, you can use this unified syntax across different output
formats with a Cordo report you're putting together. Again, while I think that Cordo reports,
you know, in terms of making them look beautiful and typesetting them is very useful, ultimately
a different value that Cordo provides is that it can also add code in both the display of that code,
the hiding of that code, or, you know, just the output of that code itself as a graphic, as a table,
or as raw text. So in your document you might have something like this, where you have an HTML
document you're creating and you want to have, you know, the code not be shown. Maybe you're
generating a report that's going up to leadership, they don't necessarily want to read R code or
Python code, they just want to see the final report. They don't necessarily care how you got there,
maybe they just want to see the details. So in this case you can still keep the source code,
so you can keep your .qmd that has all the source code, the links out to the data,
basically how you got there, but when you generate out your report it doesn't show any of the code,
it just shows the output and the commentary that you've added to it. You can still turn on code
individually, so let's say you turned on echo equals false at the top in the YAML. At the code
chunk level you can actually add and say like for this one code chunk I want it to be echo equals
true. So regardless of what the YAML says, turn echo and actually show the code for this specific
document. You can also, rather than hide all the code and make it where no one can see it,
is you can do what's called code folding. And in this case you'll have code folding that you can
hide temporarily in terms of it'll fold all the code behind a little menu bar that you can click
on and that little menu bar will be called hidden code. So you can click on each individual code
chunk and display it and then collapse it as you move forward. And again this could be turned on
at the specific code chunk level where I could have code folding turned on for one code chunk,
so even if I was hiding all the rest of it for one that might be really important,
I can still say hey this one allows you to toggle the code showing on or off again.
Going a bit further, you know, maybe we want to show the code, maybe you don't want to show the
code, we can also use what are called code dash tools. So in your format, might have format equals
html or pdf, code tools equals true gives us this little overlay where the user can make all of the
decisions. So at the very top of the document they can have this little drop down and they can you
know hide all the code or show all the code or in some situations even view the source document.
So you can embed all of the source code into the document and when you click on it that allows you
to show all the source code before the results were generated or link out to an external repository.
Again this just allows you to make those decisions as you're using it for reporting
but you can choose how much of the code or how much of the context you want to display for your users.
If we wanted to show the source in terms of like literally embed the source code into the document
you could use code tools equals source equals true, toggle equals false, and no caption.
And this will allow you to see the source code but all the code is also displayed in the
document and you're not trying to hide it, you're just trying to also embed all that source code so
that users can see it or you as you're automating that report can also see
how the document was generated and if anything has changed over time.
Overall when you display or look at the source code it might look something like this
where you have an overlay that pops up displaying what was all the source code that you used,
literally the markdown as well as the code chunks and all the options of it.
So again very useful for kind of checking that your source code
is actually valid for what your expectations are.
For other situations where you don't necessarily want to embed all the source code into the
document or in some situation where you really don't want to show the code itself you want to
have it in like a private github repository or maybe it's just really long and you don't want
to embed all of that because the user experience is not ideal, you could actually use code tools
plus source and indicate an external repository. So here we're linking out to cordo-dev and
linking out to a specific markdown file that displays the source code for that specific page.
So they can actually go and look at it on a first class you know version control system
as opposed to embedding it into the document itself. But again you get to make that decision
in terms of displaying the code, hiding the code, embedding the source code,
all those different things you can do for your user's experience.
We can then move on to things like making the overall document look a bit better.
So maybe you do want to show the code but you have like a dark theme or you have a specific
style that you want to apply to the code. So by default your code might look something like this
where it's highlighting things like library dplyr and your groupby and other function calls are
highlighted in blue your arguments are in green and it's doing some highlighting of specific
components but it's really white on white with this background. There's a lot of highlighting
options that I've included in a link at the full highlighting options but you can modify this
throughout your document. So for our different themes let's say we're using an html report
we can stick with highlight style equals arrow which will look something like this where you have
blue for function calls you can have logical statements that are a little bit lighter blue
numerics are in red and it allows you to kind of read the source code a bit easier as opposed to
them all being one color all being black or gray or something. But again what if you made this into
like a dark mode? So here we've modified the yaml header to have the same highlight style of arrow
which is the one we're trying to use for accessibility reasons for contrast and other
things but then we had the ability to toggle on and off a light mode and a dark mode. So in Cordo
if you use a theme equals light and theme equals dark and change those out you can actually have a
toggleable option to make a switch from light mode into dark mode. Now this again will modify
how the code itself looks on the page because your background is black. So you can use a highlight
style like arrow that works for both light and dark and it will actually modify the background
color of the source code to also match the light or the dark theme. So again by changing out some
of the styling you can make your overall document look the same or have the same kind of theming or
consistency as you move across it. So while you know changing code itself is kind of cool overall
you're probably a bit more interested in what you know what else you can do with that code.
So in R there's a package called download and this not only provides like syntax highlighting
but also links out to specific source code. So if you're using download and actually evaluating code
this will actually allow you to click on the functions in the chunk output and it'll actually
link out to the documentation for that. So you imagine someone's like oh I saw this cool package
called per and it's got this function called walk that Tom was talking about in the presentation.
You can actually click on my source code and click on per walk and it will take you to the
documentation for per walk. So you can read a bit more about that function. So download again will
provide this linking of the R code to external documentation so that when people find something
they've never used before they can actually move forward into the documentation and have a lot of
power there to learn on the fly. So while code is cool ultimately I think that you want to do
something like the overall aesthetics. You have Howard here and his you know finest garb he wants
to look good for the presentation. You also want your report or your presentation to look nice for
your users or for your kind of stakeholders. So for HTML documents out of the box Cordo is
styled with something called Bootstrap 5. This is the CSS framework for websites and version 5
is one of the latest versions. It overall applies a lot of different theming to the overall document.
So Cordo comes pre-installed with 25 different themes allowing you to set the aesthetics or the
appearance of the overall document and you can use them in one or two lines of code. So in your YAML
header you might define a format equals HTML and the theme as something like litera. That is a nice
minimal theme that really makes the information pop as opposed to trying to make a really fancy
background or something. But there's lots of different themes that you can customize and go
further. Maybe you want to start from the litera theme but further customize it with a .scss file
that's modifying the structure or the appearance of the document beyond the defaults that are
applied with the litera theme. So you're not stuck with it you can continue to customize it
with either CSS files or SCSS files in this case if you're using the theme output.
Bootstrap themes are, you know, there's many of them. Again I mentioned 25. I just have a small
selection of six here on the page. So again these are going to change all the different elements
typefaces, menu bars, nav bars, the overall kind of weight of different fonts, and then colors of
both the background, the foreground, and buttons. So when you're creating these HTML documents this
again allows you to create nice looking documents and not having to change all the specific
components yourself but using these pre-built themes that look really nice out of the box.
When I gave some initial overview talk about kind of reporting or in our first workshop we did
there's a lot of people asking about PDFs. You know obviously I think HTML is one of the best
formats and you can do the most with it but in certain situations like a journal article they
want to get a LaTeX file or they want to get a PDF or in some organizations just they want PDFs
because they're emailing them around or doing things like that. So Cordo can accept what are
called templates that allow you to style or kind of take it as a default structure with LaTeX files.
So if you have those laying around or modify them you can further customize and optimize for PDF
if that's the route you want to go. There's also support for kind of first class journal
articles from Cordo so actually taking a document not having to go and do write all this LaTeX code
that you're customizing it with but just using one of the Cordo journal formats and publishing
it out to a specific kind of specific publication that you want to go to like the ACM or the Journal
of Statistical Science or something like that and you can end up with a report that looks really
really nice with this journal statistical software where again you're not having to write
all of the custom LaTeX to make the PDF look like this but rather making use of Cordo's built-in
kind of Cordo journals formats that are available and just writing things like what is the abstract
what is the title what are the authors and their affiliations and it will take that and build it
into the document to actually provide a useful output or what the journal statistical software
is expecting when you actually deliver the article to them. Again Cordo wants to support this idea of
reproducible science you know whether that's science in an organization and you're creating
kind of static PDFs or HTML documents or actually publishing in academia to journals or to specific
journals in some cases. I want to say there's like 10 or 12 journals that are supported as of today
but we're also taking kind of feedback from the community as to what other journals are
needed and working with specific groups to get those built out. I also want to call out a nice
project from the NFMS open science team so they put together a Cordo extension called Cordo title
pages. The tech templates were written by Eli Holmes and the Lua filter that kind of makes it
available to Cordo was written by Mikiel and they have reports that look something like this. So yes
this is not necessarily like a journal article this is more of like a professional PDF report
that you might use in a business setting allowing you to put your company logo and stylize the
report in a specific way while also adding subtitles and authors and other things to the
document. Something you could deliver in like a consulting setting or in a business setting.
There are additional ones but mostly this is focused on improving the title page which is a
big deal in some of the PDFs and making those look really really nice as the default. So I just wanted
to call out some great work that they've already done and linking out to their repository that
talks more about that. So we've talked a lot and kind of gotten through a lot of different things
with reports in terms of HTML reports, theming them, including code, PDF reports, and articles
and how you can modify those. I want to spend the last kind of section of today talking about
presentations. Again I'm using Cordo to write the presentation today about Cordo so I really
believe in the tool and its ability to help you tell stories. There's a lot of supported output
types and I'll just call out three specific ones. Reveal.js which is an HTML format that's what
I'm using today. It has the most power and you can use all of kind of HTML and CSS and even some
JavaScript to do a lot with your presentation. But there's also support for things like PowerPoint
if you need to work in an office setting or Microsoft Office kind of suite or if you want
really prefer working with like LaTeX or PDF you can also use the Beamer format to work with that
structure. So regardless of kind of which format you're going to do I'm going to focus on initially
things that are cross-format and then talk about some things that are specific to Reveal.js that
are really powerful and exciting in my mind. I also want to call out again two other community
resources that I've linked to here on the slides. So Emil wrote this kind of slide craft 101 and
we'll talk about that at the end of the presentation about colors and fonts and using them in Cordo.
And then Megan put together this nice overview of customizing Cordo slides and adding little
section headings that say like you know rather than just being 37 of 58 slides through
which section are we on and what's going on in that page.
For the things that are shared across the different formats so again LaTeX or HTML or PowerPoint
there's many different things that are shared across that. So you can use what are called
incremental reveal or incremental lists that allow you to display specific list elements one
by one. You can control the column layout, the title, the subtitle, the author, you know the
kind of title page of your document. You can control the headings as well as you're using
code so you're able to display that code, hide that code, and actually generate things like
tables, graphics, and text as the output of your code that you're generating from your Cordo
presentation. The first thing to remember is you know for creating slides it could be as simple as
this. In the YAML header define a specific format so I'm using reveal.js but that could be PowerPoint
X or Beamer and then each of your additional slides will be indicated with a level one or
a level two header and that's what indicates a new slide. So slide one is a level two header,
slide one. Two more pound signs, slide two, and that'll be slide two. And this allows you to
structure your document in a way that you can read the source code but the actual Cordo
representation knows how to turn it from that source code into the final output that you're creating.
So overall you know very short slide but just one that shows you
how quick you can get started with creating slide decks with just a few lines of markdown code.
There's also this idea of incremental lists and an incremental list means that it increments across it.
So you might have like three or four bullet points and rather than displaying them all at once
you can actually have them be incremental where it'll show bullet point one, then you click an
arrow, bullet point two, click the arrow, bullet point three, and so on. So that you can actually walk
through your slides like I'm doing today as opposed to them all showing up at one time.
So you can do this from the YAML header with incremental equals true
or you can turn it on and off via fence divs. So I might have something like this where again I use
three colons to start, three colons to end, and then I have an dot incremental class and this will
work across any of the presentation formats and it'll say first Howard sleeps and then the next
one Howard sprints. He's always sleeping or running around in terms of he's an active dog or he's a
very sleepy dog. But you can walk through the different parts of your presentation and control
the overall structure in this way. You can also turn off incremental. So let's say that you had
incremental equals true and you want to say that well you know I want to say that Howard eats and
then he sleeps. Like that's kind of one thought that I'm putting together even though it's
it's two different bullet points. So if he eats he's immediately going to go take a nap. He's not
going to go run around after that. So you can turn on or turn off these incremental lists from the
YAML or from Pandoc fence divs with the dot incremental or non-incremental classes.
You can also control the overall structure of your presentation in terms of creating left and
right columns or how those appear. This one's a bit more complex in terms you have what's called
a dot columns class first and you might notice I have four colons here at the start and four
colons at the bottom. This allows me to nest additional fence divs within that kind of parent
div. So overall I have a dot columns class and then I'm creating two or more columns that I want
to create within it. So within the dot columns class I create another three colons with a dot
column and I can control the width so you know make it 50 50 or 40 60 or whatever kind of
percentage I want from left and right. And then I'm also using reveal js's dot fragment class
that allows me to display the content on the left first and then display the content on the right
after that's done. So you can kind of build off of these classes and brackets and fence divs together
and overall structure your document across different formats.
So while those type of things are useful and that gives you a lot of the way in terms of if I
stopped right there you could actually get started making presentations like you could actually make
a nice presentation from that. I do want to call out some specific reveal js options that are very
powerful and allow you to do a lot of different things. So I'm going to have Rachel use one of
our secret tips. So on this page we can use alt plus click to zoom into a section and if I pop up
this tiny picture of Howard on the screen she can alt click again to back out of that and she can
actually zoom in specifically on Howard. So you can imagine that you might have source code or
you know something else on the page that looks small but you can zoom in on it to highlight it.
Rachel can also do command plus on her screen that will actually increase the size of things
like the url or the logo at the bottom. So she can zoom in a little bit on the page and that will
actually make that a bit bigger and zoom out a few times and make the url a bit smaller.
Overall just make that part a little bit easier to work with. That's part of the benefit of html
is you can modify things temporarily on the fly.
You can also use things called absolute positioning. So like that last image I put it
very specifically in the bottom left so that we had to go find it and zoom in on it.
I use some code like this another fence div and I use the dot absolute class and then I can say
what is the geometry. So from the bottom 25 pixels up and from the left 100 pixels over
and then display the image as normally with a fragment class which shows up later.
But you can place it anywhere on the screen in that way and really tightly control placement
of images or logos or even text that you're putting on the page. It allows you to better
tell stories as you're moving through it. Another one that I really like for reveal.js
is using what's called output dash location. This is actually used within code junks so you
might have something like this where you're loading the ggplot package doing a quick plot
of empty cars and then if I advance the slide it throws that image directly next to it in the
second column and it's a fragment so it shows up later. And this again allows you to step through
showing the code and showing the output as you're moving through the document.
There are many other output dash location classes but just this is the one that I find the most
useful in terms of delaying showing it and putting it in the column next to the source code.
So I can have long source code and a nice image next to it.
Just like with html or using pdf with different themes or kind of partials you're bringing in,
Cordo presentations and specifically reveal.js also come with built-in themes. So there's 10
themes listed here on the page and you can apply those with the theme argument in the yaml header.
And again these will change all the different elements of the presentation
including kind of the tables, the headers, the background colors, the foreground colors,
lots of different elements you can change on the fly very very quickly.
If for some reason you didn't think the theme was good enough or there was something that you
didn't agree with you can always customize it further and apply your own custom.scss file
to modify specific components of the presentation.
So like for today I wanted to use a very specific font. You know I like the Fira Mono
class of fonts for code and at RStudio we use Open Sans as kind of our default font family.
So I can import those fonts from the Google Fonts API and then apply some different colors,
make the text at the bottom orange, make the level two headers this nice dark blue,
kind of this RStudio blue, and also use Open Sans and Fira Mono as my default font and my
monospace font. So again I you know not a lot of code but just modifying a little bit to make it
look just like I want it to. So using a theme and making it go farther with some of these different
customizations. I can also add a footer or specific logo. So I could use a local image so maybe I have
the RStudio logo locally at the bottom right of my slide or I have some footer that says like
footer text or a URL or another hyperlink to the source code. For my presentations I like to again
use the URL to the hosted RStudio logo so I don't have to keep bringing it around. I can just link
out to the URL of that one and then for the footer I can also use the you know a specific hyperlink.
So with markdown style code I can say reports and presentations with Cordo and then link out to the
slides that are hosted on Cordo Pub. But for this page you might notice the footer is not that in
terms of you can actually change the footer as a one-off and if you look at the very bottom it's
kind of small but did you see did you notice the footer and using a fenced div you can apply a
footer class and modify the footer slide by slide by slide. So for one footer you might link out
to this URL and for the next one it could be an entirely different footer. You can override the
default that's defined in the YAML. But again that will only apply for that specific slide so if I
advance to the next one it'll go back to my overall URL. At this point you're probably seeing dozens
of pictures of Howard in his nice gentleman outfit. I've used what's called a slide background
to overlay many different images across that. Not the most effective use of it but just showing you
a couple different possibilities of how you can use images or other things as your slide background
to tell a story. I did that with you know a level two header slide background and then used these
curly brackets to actually define specific things about it. So made the color equals black, the
background image was one of Howard's gentlemen, and I made them 100 pixels wide and repeated if they
were not big enough to take up the whole screen. Overall there's a lot of different things you can
do with this in addition to the background color. You can use a local or a URL to an image, you can
make the image cover the background or not cover, make it a specific size, change the opacity or the
transparency, you can do a lot of customization to really make it easy to inject background images
to your slides. We're not just limited to images, you can also use it with GIFs if you're using those
to tell part of your story or tell a joke, and you can even use it to just change the color.
So I might do something like slide background background color equals black and this will make
the overall body black but make the text white. It will try and always do a high contrast color
for changing the font color itself so you don't have to do that manually, you can just change
the background color and the foreground color will change along with it.
And just like with images or GIFs, you can also do background videos. These are rather than
background image, it would be background dash video and you can control the looping or does it play
audio or is it muted, and again things like the size or the opacity. So you could actually embed a
full-size video taking up the entire screen if that was what you were trying to do in your slides or
in your presentation. There's some other helpers, so things like R dash stack and combining that
with fragments. I can take three images and display them on top of each other very efficiently
one by one by one. Again you might have like several different images in unison that you're
displaying, so something like here's a Boston Terrier in a field, here's a juvenile Boston
Terrier laying down on the ground, and here's an adult Boston Terrier wearing fancy clothing.
And you can all kind of stack them on top of each other and apply them one by one by combining the
dot R stack and the fragment classes to display them overall.
As we close out, we've got a couple more slides to go. I just want to again call out Amil's article
and kind of how he approached using color and custom styles to apply and change his documents.
I hyperlinked out to his article so that orange article will actually take you to
his overall blog post, but in his SCSS styles that he added, he included a dot blue and a dot yellow
dot blue and a dot yellow class. And these just inject a little bit of color to help tell his
story a little bit differently in his presentations. So in action he might write some text that looks
like this. He uses bracketed spans to say quarto in blue, enables you to weave together content
which will show up in yellow, and executable code in yellow into a finished presentation.
To learn more about quarto, makes it blue again, see this specific link. So by doing that,
he's using the existing kind of context of bracketed spans but adding in his own custom
classes to style the document a little bit differently. And he gets a nice looking page
like this where you can really highlight that quarto content, executable code, and finished
presentation is the story here. So while he might read off the slide or I might read off this slide,
you can really see that we're focused on quarto content, executable code,
and that's a nice summary of what quarto provides. Content, text, and executable code all together.
And you can further extend this with what you need to do or what you want to do with writing
your own classes. Again he used the bracketed span syntax, so you know square brackets around
some text and then applying his specific class to that. But you can also use RStudio's visual
editor and he actually talks about this in his article. And you can use, you know, insert a
specific span or specific div and then it'll pop up saying what are the type of classes you want
to apply to that. So this is really useful for maybe you can't remember all the different syntax,
you can actually insert divs and spans with the visual editor inside RStudio.
That's it for today. We got it all done in an hour somehow. We covered a lot of different
things with reports and presentations, theming them including html, pdf, doing reports and
presentations together and separately, parameterized our markdown and parameterized quarto and how those
are different and the same. And I wanted to give you a few links out to some nice articles and
content. So if you just want to read about quarto, you can go to quarto.org slash docs slash guide.
That's the overall guide for quarto. But there's also sub links to documents or articles and
reports or journal articles if you're trying to publish in an academic setting. I also wanted to
call out again a few of the open source efforts by other people outside of kind of the core quarto
team. So quarto title pages by the group from NMFS or Emile and Megan's articles on slide craft 101
and quarto slides and what those look like. So a lot of nice content here and you can access my
slides at thomasmock.quarto.pub slash reports dash presentations. Or Rachel was kind enough to
give me a short link which is much better rstd.io slash quarto dash reports that has all the content
for today. I thought that might be a little easier there. Thank you so much Tom. Really,
really appreciate it. This is awesome. I'm just getting started with quarto too and
this is really helpful thinking about some of the formatting I was trying to figure out.
There are so many great questions. How long do we have you for? I'm here for the the full journey.
So I blocked off the remaining part of this before lunch. So I'm in for the long haul.
Awesome, great. So thank you all for for all the great questions. I did want to
remind everybody that you can ask questions in LinkedIn if you're watching there on YouTube live
or you can ask anonymously and I will show that Slido here as well. I was also playing around
with a few polls as well so just asking if people have used quarto and what other journals you would
like to see. So Tom, if there's other questions you want us to ask everybody else, feel free to
put them in the the private chat. We'll go back and forth between YouTube and LinkedIn here.
A question from Jimmy was any plans to make quarto template functionality
similar to what R Markdown draft does?
If I'm being honest, I'm not very familiar with R Markdown draft. So give me 10 seconds and I'll
look up that function. But just very honestly, I'm not very familiar with the R Markdown draft option.
So let me make sure I understand the question and we'll go from there. So let's see. Ah, okay. So
ah, okay. So kind of like using it as a template is my understanding is R Markdown draft creates
and actually edits a draft of an R Markdown based on a template. So there's a couple ways of doing
that in terms of the RStudio dev team is working on some more integration of like there are R
Markdown templates that exist in RStudio and that's kind of a first class idea of you can like
new file, new R Markdown use this specific template. The RStudio dev team is still
working on that idea for quarto. And then for quarto documents themselves, you can use either
the extensions kind of workflow or kind of other ways of bringing in kind of a overall document,
importing code or specific chunks and then further modifying it. That's a good option. And I'll go
back to the dev team and see if we have some additional thoughts there. But yeah, cool to
learn about the draft function and kind of learn something new on these presentations.
Thank you. A question from Slido was, can you apply the same code highlighting to different
outputs? So for example, HTML or PDF without the call having to be nested under format?
Yeah, so I would say that if you're doing something like styling, you're typically you're
taking that step forward saying the defaults aren't good enough. And I have very strong
opinions. So I would say the safest option is doing them separately because like PDF has certain
things that can do and HTML is certain other things that it can only do. So while there are
times where you can reuse the components, like even when I was using the blood theme, which is
kind of like a Dracula style theme for presentations, I rendered it to PowerPoint and
some of the theming came across basically what changes it could make. But overall, it wasn't
one to one per se. So if you really want to go further and customize it, like there's first
class ways of doing that in all the different formats. So PowerPoint, you can import a template
from PowerPoint. PDF, you can do additional theming or tech partials. And for HTML, you can
do CSS or SCSS to customize them. So while yes, you know, for code highlighting alone, there are
some options where you can try and reuse it. There might be a time where you get frustrated and it's
better to kind of hop out to if you're really trying to do like PDF and make it look a certain
way, further customizing it in that way.
Awesome, thank you. I was trying to go over to, let's see, trying to go over to LinkedIn for one
of the answers to this question. So I will ask a different one first. Oh, wait, here it is. Daniel
asks, any websites that, in your opinion, have the best Shiny Cordo output examples that you
could share with others at your company? Yeah, I would say, you know, today, what Cordo provides
with integrating with Shiny is traditional websites in terms of there's not a dashboard
style Cordo yet. The Cordo team is actively working on dashboard style documents or dashboard layouts
with Cordo that will come in the future. But, you know, if you're really trying to invest in like
Shiny and trying to make it look really beautiful with Shiny alone, there's things like Shiny
Dashboard or Fresh or BS Lib specific to Shiny that allow you to structure and kind of theme
those overall documents. In the future, we'll have kind of a better answer for you, which is like,
if you're trying to create a dashboard with Shiny and Cordo together, there will be a first class
dashboard format. However, if you're creating it today, it's basically going to look like a
website that has Shiny code built into it. So I would, you know, go to the Cordo.org. There's a
gallery. And that has a lot of the content today and will be updated over time. And I'll drop that
chat link to Rachel. So she has the gallery link. But, you know, today it talks about like
interactive docs with Shiny or with Observable or Jupyter widgets. But, you know, they're really
going to look like websites as opposed to dashboards right now. Awesome. Thank you. Yeah,
I put that link into the chat. I also see someone had shared it on LinkedIn a bit earlier too. So
thank you for sharing that. Someone else asked, are there built in themes for PowerPoint?
Yeah. So, you know, again, some of the theme components work across formats. So like I was
using like the blood theme that's built in for Reveal.js and some of that came across in the
PowerPoint. There is an article on Cordo.org for PowerPoint presentations specifically. And again,
once you get into the level of theming, that basically says like, not only do I care about
outputting to PowerPoint, but someone has strong opinions about that theme.
So if you use what are called PowerPoint templates, that's a first class idea in the
PowerPoint world, both in and outside of Cordo. That is how you can use like a company theme
that modifies the title page and the layout and the colors and the fonts for PowerPoint specifically.
And because that's a proprietary format, there are some limitations around how much we can do
that in Cordo, as opposed to how much of that is like the solved answer is use a template that
the PowerPoint has. I'm really impressed by Tom's ability to talk and find the links at the same
exact time and send them to me. So I just put that in the chat as well. Thanks, Rachel.
Another one was, how do you keep long Cordo documents organized for yourself as you're
working on a presentation? Yeah, there's a couple ways. If I'm being honest about like writing a
presentation, I'm usually have many different things open in terms of like, I have some
experimentation files that I'm like testing out specific ideas, and then I'm putting those into
the individual slides. But I will say that in terms of like, when I write Cordo documents in
our studio, the level two headers, the code chunks, all those show up in the document outline.
So if you use that, you can navigate pretty quickly, even through like an 800 or 900 line
presentation. So like today's one, because it's almost 60 slides, I want to say it was around
like 700 lines of text overall. And using the outline view in our studio allows me to kind of
move between slides really quickly, especially if I'm like changing something at the title
at the very first slide, and then jumping to slide 50. Like using those allows me to navigate
the document a bit better. The other thing I will just mention is that Cordo, regardless of the
format, does allow you to use what are called includes. So you can imagine that the final
document I'm putting together for leadership might actually be from four or five different people.
And they might actually write a specific section, and then you could just import or what is called
include them in the parent document. So if you look for includes on Cordo.org,
it will actually allow you to access existing content and bring it into the parent document,
and actually just inject like all of that QMV or that markdown file in that location. So especially
if you have like a bunch of different people working on one thing, yes, you could collaborate
across source control, but they could also write their own kind of thing, and you just bring it
into the parent. Great, thank you. Okay, this is a little bit of a longer question. So essentially,
like what are the benefits of converting from R Markdown to Cordo, especially for someone who
maybe has hundreds of R Markdown reports? Yeah, I would say overall, the beauty is that we support
both in terms of if I say we as in our studio, like the core team that works on R Markdown is
the same team that works on Cordo. So you don't have to change everything, which is a great thing.
Like if someone told you tomorrow, hey, stop doing what you're doing and move to this,
that would be very disruptive, and that's not the goal of anything with Cordo. There are
differences, and there are trade-offs and benefits for using Cordo or using R Markdown for certain
situations. But especially if you've got like a thousand line R Markdown report, or you've got a
workflow that's working, great, like keep using it. Like we're continuing to support R Markdown.
We're not like abandoning it. We are still doing bug fixes and kind of improvements over time.
Just if you think about it with like new features, there were limitations in terms of how we extended
R Markdown. The way to extend R Markdown was to write another R package that extended it,
and with Cordo, a lot of it is baked into the one install. So rather than having to manage
multiple packages or have it be only with R, we're trying to not only improve things for our R users,
but also bring essentially like all of R Markdown to the Julia language and to Python and to teams
that don't even use code. Like just bring a visual editor and Markdown-style scientific
communication without having to manage data science languages. So it's a bit hard of a
question to answer in a short format, but I would say just like if you have existing R Markdown,
you can keep using them. For basic R Markdown, you can use Cordo to actually
render or convert those, but you definitely don't have to convert over.
And would, for somebody hoping to convert some of their docs, is that Welcome to Cordo workshop
a good resource or what would you recommend? Yes. Yeah, that first overview as well as some
of the content on cordo.org, it talks about taking an existing R Markdown and a basic one at that
where the conversion cost is essentially zero because Cordo and R Markdown are essentially
backwards compatible with each other. The difference being that like R Markdown has
specific CSS and PDF and LaTeX that it applies, and Cordo does things a little bit different
visually. Like the code will still work between them for the most part, but the visual representation
is different between the two. The two-hour webinar has some additional content that would go over
that. Awesome. I see a question from Rob on LinkedIn that was, would things like checkboxes
or radio buttons be available or would one need Shiny for that level of complexity?
There's a couple of ways to approach it. So yes, if you want checkboxes and radio buttons that
execute R code, then you would need Shiny, right? Because you have to have a server that takes that
checkbox you're doing and executes it along with some R code. However, both in R and Python and in
JavaScript within Cordo, there are things for checkboxes or cross-language talking. So in R,
there's things called HTML widgets and crosstalk that provides basic filters and select with
checkboxes and little buttons. In Python, there's something called IPython widgets or IPy widgets
that again, give you both a JavaScript kind of framework and then some toggles you can do with it
or native to kind of the JavaScript land, but also applies to other languages.
Observable.JavaScript is included with Cordo. So you can build out custom kind of interfaces
and checkboxes, you know, just through Cordo alone that interact with both R and Python code.
So I'll drop a link to Rachel for Observable.JavaScript. That's going to look very similar
to Shiny in terms of like the buttons you're expecting. And it can be embedded with R and
with Shiny and with Python. But it's actually JavaScript that you're writing just in a very
friendly way. Like it's a great library and I'm glad it was included with the integration to Cordo.
Great, thank you. Heading back over to Slido, some of the questions over there.
Any plans to add more categories to the author argument in the YAML?
Because it's well known you can add authors and affiliations, but it would be cool to also add role.
Yeah, absolutely. So the default things that are available from Cordo are kind of limited to what's
available for like the categories in the author. Especially once you get into specific journal
formats, the author section and affiliations really expand because certain articles and certain
journals want new things added on. Like there are requirements. So yes, some of the journal articles
that already exist, those journal article extensions allow for this. And if you're interested,
you can also add your own format that adds whatever you want. Like you could add a favorite
pet as an author argument to your YAML and just like write an extension that provides that.
If you wanted to learn more about that, I would look at the kind of article templates
that you can modify on Cordo.org. And those are kind of like .tech formats or CSS that you're
bringing in that allow you to further extend what's available in the YAML header. And that's
really what those extensions are for, is adding on custom things that you want to see that maybe
aren't as generally used. Awesome. Thank you. And I see you had shared with me, Tom, a question for
everybody. And it was what kind of Cordo content would you like to see in the future? And so I just
put that as a poll over on the Slido as well if you want to share there. Awesome. Okay. I see
someone just asked a question over on LinkedIn, and it is Mayank asked, can we include custom
HTML, CSS, JavaScript code combination for parts of a Cordo document as we did with our markdown?
Yeah, absolutely. So, there's option, when I talked about includes from before, that include
could be used for including child documents or other QMDs. But I also just dropped a link for
Rachel called includes, you know, before body, after body, in header, resources, metadata files.
Those different options allow you to include, like, literal JavaScript code or CSS or, like,
Google analytics.HTML files that are injected into the document. And those are able to be
included in a couple of the most common locations. So, before the body, after the body, in the
header, like, there's specific locations where HTML needs to inject that type of metadata for it
to be used by the website. So, Cordo has the first class support for doing that with the include dash
something else options. Great. Thank you. Arun asked on YouTube, does Cordo work with
Sharingan? Yeah. So, there's a long answer and a short answer, and I'll try and do both quickly.
So, the long answer is that Sharingan uses a library called remark.js, which is not Pandoc
compatible markdown. So, while it was useful with our markdown, it's funny, like, Yiwei was
actually talking about it. He never intended for it to be popular. It was for his use.
And it required what he called, like, ninja level knowledge to do certain things with it.
Reveal.js is Pandoc compatible markdown. So, that's the one that Cordo settled on as the HTML
format is that because you could use it with the visual editor and it was compatible with all the
rest of Pandoc, that was the one that they settled on. If you take an existing Sharingan
presentation and try and render with Cordo, it will work in terms of I'm putting that in scare
quotes. It will render it into some type of presentation, but Sharingan used a lot of custom
themes, a lot of custom CSS, custom classes, and different ways of writing that is just not fully
compatible with Cordo. That all being said, and continuing the long answer, I was a Sharingan
absolute power user, loved using it, and I've fully converted over to doing Reveal.js. I really,
really enjoy it. If I wanted to, I could still write Sharingan, but Reveal.js adds in a lot of
things that clicked with me, and again, the unified syntax across all of HTML is nice, where
I don't have to remember how do I do it in this one specific package,
but this is the way to do it across all HTML style outputs, and Cordo was a nice option.
Thank you. Quick reminder, if anybody's looking for the content and slides from the talk today,
I'll just share the link up here on the screen again. I see a few Slido questions that I have
a lot of upvotes right now, and one is, any plans of creating tutorials for ... I don't think I know
what this is, but .txt templates for PDF output for Cordo would be amazing. Yeah, so there's some
ongoing work for writing things like Lua filters and other things like that. Let me see if I can
find Lua development in creating formats. So, this article I'm sharing with Rachel has some
of the information about when you're writing a custom format, what all do you need to include?
Ultimately, in terms of while we might end up writing .tech template examples or theming
components, tech is its own massive ecosystem, and while you might be able to get introduced to it
from Cordo.org, for example, it's such a broad topic that I'd be afraid that lots of things would
get left out. So, ultimately, it's like, if your team, you know, what Cordo's trying to provide
is a lot of very common and powerful templates, so things like journal articles where I could
publish to this journal without knowing any tech, right? Like, that is my mindset. I don't know any
LaTeX, and I can still publish in the format that this journal wants. So, JSS wants this, you know,
LaTeX file that they're getting. I can do that with Cordo. If I want to customize PDF to go a
certain way, I really need to learn a little bit of tech or tech partials to further customize that,
and that's a skill that I would need to develop to be successful in that role. So, yes and no
in terms of there's some documentation around creating formats and how that can be used for
specific things and distributing them, developing filters and things with Lua, but there aren't
major plans for tech templates today. Again, I do want to call out that, like, the open source
community has already started building out some of these. So, I'll call it again the S group,
and they're in the gallery on Cordo.org. They actually put together source code for,
kind of, how they've approached building out those. So, grabbing that content, and if I miss
Cordo, Pandoc. I'm actually looking for this one, so give me a second to find
those. I could go back to my presentation and just do it that way. There we go. All right. So,
I'm going to drop this into the chat for Rachel. So, that one actually talks about how to modify
their templates and how to modify and use and DIY some of it. That resource is amazing. Like,
it's a great amount of work they did to both do it, but then also write about how they did it.
So, while that won't teach you everything about .tech and partials and everything else,
it at least gives you, like, a nice structured way of learning. And again, because it's an open
source project, over time, additional people, including us and others, will build out educational
content or, kind of, extension content around that. So, specifically, the how to use DIY and
how to modify on that link that Rachel just shared. And if you wanted to actually screen share that
page, I can walk you through some of that on the side. It's a great site, and kudos to that team.
Awesome. Let me get that up. I was just trying to copy over to LinkedIn,
too, and just let everybody know, if you're looking for these real-time links and you're
watching on LinkedIn, I wasn't able to do both at the same time. So, if you want to head over to
YouTube. But here, let me put this up. Yeah. So, again, this page has, like, seven or eight
templates that they provide that are great. Like, they just work out of the box. But off of the left
sidebar, if you see the how to use DIY or how to modify, those actually, if you click on, like,
how to modify, it talks about, you know, the first thing. Modifying Pandoc templates sounds
like fun. Like, yes, it's kind of tongue-in-cheek. But, you know, you can modify it, how it works,
what is going on. And it talks a little bit about, like, what the things you do for Cordo,
as well as, like, some of the things you use for their specific format. But again,
because there's so much customization you can do in the .tech file that's
completely separate from Cordo, you do at some point have to learn that if you really want to
customize all of that yourself. But this is a great starting page. It talks about the Latex
structure and all sorts of other things. I would go here. Great, great resource.
Awesome. Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Let's go through as many questions as we can get to. And
I promise I will share all these other questions with you, Tom, if we don't get to something.
Okay. So, this is an anonymous question. If we know we want to use a number of parameters,
do we have to give one of those parameters as a default in the YAML?
Yeah. So, you'll want to define them at least because you could imagine that when you're
trying to render it, if you have a – if you indicate it in the body of the document,
it has to have a default value. So, if you don't define it in the YAML,
then when the document is just rendered with, like, the render button or Cordo render,
it's going to fail because that object doesn't exist. And it's like, I don't know where to find
this. It doesn't exist. So, you will need to define at least some default in the YAML that's
used for the first rendering, and then you can modify it further. That really applies to both,
like, the body of the document because you have to write, you know, params, dollar sign syntax,
or use in Python, you have to at least, like, use that object. And again, if it's not defined,
then Python or R are just not going to know what to do with an object that's not defined.
I love to see people are helping answer each other's questions in the Slido as well.
But one of those I thought might be helpful to just cover here, too,
is how can we include the current date in the YAML file?
You don't even have to use sys.date. You can do date equals today. Date colon today.
One of my favorite someone actually asked me about that this morning just before coming on
to the presentation, and it's one of my favorite tricks because it's language agnostic. So, again,
you don't have to do it, you know, only within using sys.date, but on Cordo dates and formatting,
there's a built-in default for using date equals today, or date equals now,
or date equals last.modified. So, there's multiple things you can do with it in terms of, like,
did you modify today? Did you modify with a specific time as well as the date? Or when was
the last time the document was modified, not rendered, right? Like, those are all separate
things, and if you just did sys.date, it's not as flexible as some of those things that are just
built-in free options that are awesome now, and I love those things.
Okay. So, Tom, you just got really excited about that one. So, I'm curious.
Dates and tables are apparently my thing. What is your favorite thing that you've learned
in switching over to Cordo where you're like, wow, that was amazing?
I think the biggest just, like, kind of, like, mind-blown, like, absolute new feature for me
was freeze with projects. There's so many little bitty things that are cool, like,
date equals today and unified syntax and listings, but if I were to identify one or two,
and I just thought of two, we'll stick with those. One is for projects, freeze equals true,
which allows me to store the computation for an entire project, like, for my personal blog that's
five years old, I can store the computation from the first article I wrote five years ago,
and I don't have to re-render that one every time. So, that's super powerful for collaboration
or for just, like, managing documents over time. I dropped a link to Rachel for that one.
The other one that's kind of just, like, mind-blowing is website listings, because you
can basically create custom listings and build out, like, summaries and cards and
little grid layouts of all this different type of content manually or from source files,
and just built very nice-looking pages, like, just remarkably complex and in a good way.
I have to link out to this, and we're going to screen share it, so, sorry, one more,
but this is the page that gets me excited about custom listings,
and I just dropped that in the chat if you want to screen share that Connect Widgets fake one
about listings specifically.
So, the reason why I find this so cool is, like, if you look at this page, it's a summary of a
large end-to-end data science task, and we're hosting it on, like, RStudio Connect,
but in terms of, like, there's all these different things it's doing.
So, it provides this kind of background of where you can say, like, here's the diagram of all the
things that are occurring. There's a Cordo document, there's Vetiver, there's APIs,
they're all communicating together, and as you navigate down the page,
if you go further to, like, schedule jobs and things like that, keep going, there's tabs and
cards and other different things that allow you to just, like, move through all these assets you've
created. Like, this data science team put together 15 different things that make up this complex,
robust data science project, and with listing pages, you're actually able to aggregate these
into tables with filters and sorting and cards and all that's natively built into Cordo as,
like, a first-class thing. So, you don't have to escape out to...
Okay, how do you do this one? I've been trying to figure out this one. How do you do this?
I got source code for that one. The answer is lots of YAML, but let me grab... I'll share
you the GitHub repo so we can share that out as well, because this is, like, the mind-blowing
one to me. It's just, like, all of that. I'll drop one more link to you, Rachel, here in the chat.
So, that is a public repository called test-listing, and it goes through, basically,
the idea of building the Connect Widgets R package only with Cordo. So, you don't have to
use, kind of, the structure of Connect Widgets, but you can rebuild all that formatting
with cards and grid and tables. So, I really like this. That was, like, a motivating...
Listings are really cool. You should try them out.
That's amazing. Thank you. Okay.
Cheers.
I'll try to go through just a few more questions. I know we could stay on here all day,
but we can't, really. So, okay. So, going over to John's question on YouTube.
Is there a styler for Cordo, like an RStudio add-in?
So, there's a package called bslib that has a first-class plug-in for exploring themes for
our markdown. I do imagine, at some point, bslib theming will probably be available in Cordo,
but it's not today. So, my answer is there is not a RStudio add-in as of this moment in time
that might change over time. Boot swatch theme picker. I'm just looking. I believe...
Okay. There might be an option for just, like, modifying boot swatch in terms of,
like, those are the 25 themes that are built into Cordo. There's probably an application
that hosts a boot swatch theme modifier, because that's really what's happening,
is bootstrap CSS boot swatches the opinionated themes, and you can modify them.
So, no, there's not, but that's a good idea, and we're probably already working on it.
Great. Thank you. Okay. Maybe we're having too much fun with the polls over here,
but I just wanted to ask one more over there. And it doesn't have to be related to Cordo,
but I was just wondering for people listening in, what is a challenge that you've faced in
the past few weeks that we could explore creating content for? And it doesn't have to be, like,
code specific or Cordo. It could even be about, like, people focus or organization. But just
wanted to ask that to everybody as we think about what would be most helpful for you all.
And that's just on the Slido. You can access the poll there. Okay.
One other question from Slido.
Can you please quickly throw light on how to publish a Cordo document to Cordo Pub
with the YAML attributes setting file?
YAML attributes. I'm assuming – I don't want to assume too much. Let me make sure.
YAML attributes is kind of a loaded term in terms of –
We could ask for clarification.
Yeah. If you want to clarify on that one. So, Cordo Pub, I would say the best resource is that,
like, Cordo Pub is a first-class kind of description with the documentation on Cordo.org.
And it has a publish.yaml example. I think that's probably what you're talking about in terms of
that's a YAML file that allows you to modify settings for a specific Cordo Pub. You could
include that around the context of, like, your existing project. For most people, the way that
you would use Cordo Publish or Cordo Pubs is you would, from the terminal, you would do Cordo
Publish, Cordo-Pub, and then the file you want to publish. And it will then walk you through
interactively the process of, like, selecting your credentials and, yes, you want to name it this and
publishing that. With Cordo Pub and the underscore publish.yaml, or if you're doing that non-interactively
with something like continuous integration or GitHub Actions or Azure DevOps or RStudio Connect,
you can go further and basically, like, write some of those ahead of time
because you aren't going to be there to do those steps. That's, again, a pretty big thing to think
about. So, there's a lot. There's, like, a whole section on publishing on Cordo.org that's fairly
new. So, maybe last time you were looking, it wasn't there, but it has, like, description of
the underscore publish.yaml, the publish command, as well as the non-interactive publishing with
continuous integration. And I think, yeah, I shared that with Rachel, and she'll share that in the chat.
Perfect. Okay. A few other questions. One from Slido. Is there a comprehensive Cordo cheat sheet
or web page? They clarified and said, I'm finding bits and pieces of code for the YAML header and
code chunks, but nothing comprehensive. So, the best option, if you – it's not a cheat sheet at
all, but I would consider it more of, like, a reference or an appendix. So, if you go to the
Cordo.org slash docs slash reference, or at the top of Cordo.org, there's a reference header.
Yeah. Okay. Perfect. Cordo.org. And then at the top, it says reference, that fourth item.
Okay. This provides for all of the formats and different things you can do what is possible.
So, these are – this is not expanding on it in great detail. It's just describing it. But let's
say for a YAML header, if you click on documents, the HTML, the first one there, these are all the
YAML options you can provide. And then they're structured by what is, like, the grouping.
So, this is pretty bare bones, but it, like, tells you what's possible and what does it actually
mean. This is also duplicated, so when you're writing Cordo documents in RStudio or in VS Code
with the Cordo extension, if you do control plus space inside the YAML header, it will basically
pull up this list, and you can start filtering it. So, you can say, like, you know, start typing
title, and it will say, like, title is something you can autocomplete and describing it as the
document title. But this reference section gives you a massive amount of just I want the highlights
or the cheat sheet of, like, all the different things that are possible. And then if you want
to go into, like, how would I actually use them, that's where the guide section would be more
useful. Okay. And that was control plus space? Yep. Control plus space inside the YAML header
or inside a hash pipe in the code chunk will basically, like, pull up a search bar,
essentially, of, like, what is possible that you can do inside RStudio.
Great. Thank you. I think there are a few questions that touch upon this.
Chimath, and apologies if I mispronounce your name, asks, is there going to be a Cordo dashboard
offering similar to Flex Dashboard? Yes, there will be in the future. Coming soon. TBD.
Okay. Great. Okay. Two more questions, I promise. Cool.
Okay. Let me just double check on Slido that we answered the most upvoted ones, too.
Okay. Another YAML question for you. Yep. One was, the YAML file option for Cordo CLI
to set parameters was not mentioned. Any reason? Yeah. So, execute params is a sub command there
for if you think of a QMD, and I'm kind of thinking of that as, like, the first thing
that I'm working on is, like, a .qmd file. In that context, every time you execute the document,
it executes it from top to bottom linearly and re-executes everything. For Jupyter notebooks,
using, like, Python, for example, a Jupyter notebook can be rendered with the stored execution
because the Jupyter notebook behind the scenes is actually a .json file that actually stores
the computation that when it was executed. So, you can either do that and use whatever the
parameters were that were in the document as is, the defaults, or if you use dash dash execute
dash params, the one that the question has been asked about, that will basically, like,
force an execution or reference an external file in some cases. Like, maybe you don't
you can imagine, like, writing out dash param 1, dash param 2, dash param 3, dash param 4,
like, continuing on through the CLI is a lot of typing. So, if you use, like,
a external params.yaml file, that will simplify the writing of it because you have, like,
a file that has all those different parameters defined that you're bringing in.
Great. Thank you. Okay. One other question that was asked on, I think, YouTube.
Just lost it. Okay. How do you install Cordo extensions?
Yep. So, from the, there's two options for Cordo extensions are text files or zip files.
So, you can literally download it and copy and paste it over. Like, I just want to,
like, say that's totally possible. But if you look at the extensions page on Cordo.org,
it actually walks through how to install extensions. So, from the Cordo command line
interface, you could do, like, Cordo install extension font awesome or Cordo install extension
extension video or light box. And it will install that extension into a folder in your project.
So, the Cordo command line interface is the correct way to do that. But I just want to note
that they are literally text files. So, you can download it and, like, copy it or move it around
between folders if you wanted to. Just the Cordo command line interface provides a helper function
to do that efficiently. Great. Thank you. I realize I just threw 42 minutes of questions at
you. So, really appreciate it, Tom. Thank you for an awesome talk as well. One last question. If
people are looking for, like, the best way to stay up to date on new Cordo features or where to go
and how to, like, get in touch with the Cordo team, what's the best way to do that?
So, if I were to say stay up to date, Cordo has a news. Let me see if there's the
getting started. All right. So, on the download page, if you want to open this up,
um, and screen share that one. So, if you wanted to get to there,
and we'll start from the beginning, if you click on get started at the top of Cordo,
and you see it has the default, it says, like, Linux, Mac, Windows, you can install.
If you see that release notes and more downloads below Windows in the table.
Yep. If you click on that, it'll take you to the download page. And then if you scroll down,
it'll say here's all the things that have happened in the latest version. So, you can see that the
team's doing a lot of really cool work and adding a lot of things. That's in the current released
version. And if you scroll back up, it also links out to the kind of pre-release next version,
the alpha that's coming out in the future. And that also has release notes at the bottom of the
page that will talk about, like, what's coming down the pipeline or what are they working on?
Ultimately, like, because certain things released quickly, just like that page is going to be the
best broad overview of what's coming and what's happening. But if you do have questions in terms
of, like, that's a poll kind of thing. Like, I just want to read about what's happening. Great.
I can go there. If you're running into trouble or if you have questions for the dev team,
at the top of that page under help, it says ask a question. That button will take you to
the Cordo dev GitHub discussions. And there you can ask specific questions and the team can assist.
Or the best thing to do is to search for your question there. I guarantee that for a lot of
things, other people have asked questions about your topic. And you might actually be able to
find the answer there before we can put it into, like, documentation form or into a new feature.
So, you can search for all sorts of different things and say, like, hey, there's weird behavior
or I'm not quite understanding. And someone may have already asked that question or the dev team
might have answered that question or said, oh, this is a problem. We'll turn it into a GitHub
issue, for example. That's cool. I didn't realize that was right from the Cordo site, too.
Cool. The short answer to everything is Cordo.org has all of your answers or will send you to the
place to ask more questions. Perfect. Thank you so much, Tom. Really,
really appreciate it. Just want to let everybody know that this recording is available immediately
after the talk ends. It's just at the same YouTube live link. And I will try and go through,
probably not within the next hour or so, but I'm going to go grab all those links that Tom shared
and put them with the recording as well. But you should be able to see them in the chat, too.
Thank you, everybody. Thanks so much for staying and hanging out with us as well.
Have a great rest of the day. Thanks, everybody. Thanks, Rachel.